The Project Gutenberg eBook, Life and Adventures of Frances Namon Sorcho,
by Captain Louis Sorcho Great Deep Sea Diving Co.


This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions 
whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms of
the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at 
www.gutenberg.org.  If you are not located in the United States, you'll have
to check the laws of the country where you are located before using this ebook.




Title: Life and Adventures of Frances Namon Sorcho
       The Only Woman Deep Sea Diver in the World


Author: Captain Louis Sorcho Great Deep Sea Diving Co.



Release Date: May 16, 2018  [eBook #57172]

Language: English

Character set encoding: UTF-8


***START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK LIFE AND ADVENTURES OF FRANCES
NAMON SORCHO***


E-text prepared by Chris Whitehead, F E H, and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team (http://www.pgdp.net) from page images generously made
available by Internet Archive (https://archive.org)



Note: Project Gutenberg also has an HTML version of this
      file which includes the original illustrations.
      See 57172-h.htm or 57172-h.zip:
      (http://www.gutenberg.org/files/57172/57172-h/57172-h.htm)
      or
      (http://www.gutenberg.org/files/57172/57172-h.zip)


      Images of the original pages are available through
      Internet Archive. See
      https://archive.org/details/LifeAndAdventuresOfFrancesNamonSorcho


Transcriber’s Notes.

      Text enclosed by underscores is in italics (_italics_).

      Words in small capitals are shown in UPPER CASE.

      Further notes at the end of the book.





Captain Louis Sorcho Great Deep Sea Diving Co.

LIFE AND ADVENTURES OF


[Illustration]


FRANCES NAMON SORCHO

The Only Woman Deep Sea Diver
in the World.




THE BOTTOM OF THE SEA.

    There’s wondrous wealth to man unknown
          At the bottom of the sea,
    Where stately ships on Neptune’s throne
    Are rotting where the sun ne’er shone
    In silent grandeur there alone,
          At the bottom of the sea.
    Mermaids dwell in caverns bright,
    Jewels unknown flash their light,
    And untold gold is hid from sight,
          At the bottom of the sea.

    Huge anchors lie buried in golden sand,
          At the bottom of the sea.
    Sunken junks from China’s strand
    ’Mid old ship’s splendid timbers stand,
    Destruction dwells on every hand,
          At the bottom of the sea.
    Sightless fishes swim about
    The bleaching bones, and in and out
    The skulls of men, once brave, no doubt,
          At the bottom of the sea.

    The countless thousands sleeping there,
          At the bottom of the sea.
    The sailor, lover, maiden fair,
    Who in the depths her jewels wear,
    Now rest in peace without a care,
          At the bottom of the sea.
    Some are there well sewn in sail;
    Ancient warriors clad in mail;
    But one returns to tell the tale
          of the bottom of the sea.

    The diver, a mortal, like those that sleep
          At the bottom of the sea.
    An humble hero of the deep,
    In sunken vessels’ hulls doth creep
    To wrest the golden treasure heap,
          From the bottom of the sea.
    In armor, helmet, shoes of lead,
    She braves those awful depths of dread,
    The living ’mongst the million dead,
          At the bottom of the sea.

        Dedicated to FRANCES NAMON SORCHO

                              By E. D. H.




PREFACE.


To the average individual unacquainted with the art of deep sea diving
and the mysteries of the ocean away down beneath its surface, divers
are sort of super-human creatures often read about but seldom seen. How
they exist in the ocean’s depths, the queer costume they are compelled
to wear, the strange sensations they experience, the wonderful sights
they see, the desperate risks they take, and the manner in which they
work beneath the water, have, heretofore, all been a sealed volume to
the general public.

In presenting this little book to our patrons, it is our object to
enlighten them on these subjects, and give them some idea, at least, of
the life of a diver.

Mrs. Sorcho is the only woman deep sea diver in the world, and is the
only woman alive to-day who has ever donned a sub-marine armor and
descended into the ocean’s depths to work.

The example of intelligent daring is never lost on the world. The
mastery of human beings over the material world is evident on every
side, but too often are they themselves slaves to lesser things. With
skill and courage, with caution and daring, with full knowledge of
the danger, but with complete control over herself, this lady has
accomplished what no other woman has ever dared to attempt. Fears,
what are they? Coward thoughts. See Richard cowering in his tent.
See infants crying in the dark. See here a woman, who has braved the
thousand deaths that await the diver; who has calmly, yet courageously,
ventured in the ocean’s depths, with only the fishes and the thousands
awaiting the day when the sea shall give up its dead for companions;
kept herself in perfect control and invaded the mystic depths as a
conqueror, mistress alike of element and herself. Heroism is a medieval
thought, daring a classic record. To-day society languishes, passion
chills, the spirit of adventure dies, the glory of arms is stilled
by peace congresses, and human beings dwindle into a part of simple
mechanism. Four-fifths of the dangers of life are as trifles, if met
with courage, resolution and common sense.

Mrs. Sorcho is ready at any and all times to dive deeper and remain
under water longer than any other female, or forfeit $10,000.

Our armor is of the latest improved pattern, with telephone, electric
search-light, and many other up-to-date attachments invented and used
exclusively by us. The scenes presented are exactly as they occur in
the diver’s life at the ocean’s bottom, and the exhibition cannot fail
to instruct and amuse both the old and young.

Trusting it may meet with your kind approval, we are,

  Very sincerely yours,

      CAPT. LOUIS SORCHO,
      FRANCES NAMON SORCHO,
        _Deep Sea Divers_.




HISTORY OF DEEP SEA DIVING.


Just how far back the art of sub-marine diving dates, is a matter of
conjecture, but until the invention of the present armor and helmet in
1839, work and exploration under water was, at best, imperfect, and
could only be pursued in a very limited degree. The armor of to-day
consists of a rubber and canvas suit, socks, trousers and shirt in one,
a copper breastplate or collar, a copper helmet, iron-soled shoes, and
a belt of leaden weights to sink the diver.

The helmet is made of tinned copper with three circular glasses, one
in front and one on either side, with guards in front to protect
them. The front eye-piece is made to unscrew and enable the diver
to receive or give instructions without removing the helmet. One or
more outlet valves are placed at the back or side of the helmet to
allow the vitiated air to escape. These valves only open outwards
by working against a spiral spring, so that no water can enter. The
inlet valve is at the back of the helmet, and the air on entry is
directed by three channels running along the top of the helmet to
points above the eye-pieces, enabling the diver to always inhale fresh
air, whilst condensation on the glasses is avoided. The helmet is
secured to the breastplate below by a segmental screw-bayonet joint,
securing attachment by one-eighth of a turn. The junction between
the waterproof dress and the breastplate is made watertight by means
of studs, brass plates, and wing-nuts. A life or signal line enables
the diver to communicate with those above. The air-pipe is made of
vulcanized india-rubber with galvanized iron wire imbedded.

The cost of a complete diving outfit ranges from $750 to $1,000. The
weight of the armor and attachments worn by the diver is 246 pounds,
divided as follows:--

Helmet and breastplate, 51 pounds; belt of lead weights, 122 pounds;
rubber dress or suit, 19 pounds; iron soled shoes, 27 pounds each.

The greatest depth reached by any diver was 204 feet, at which depth
there was a pressure of 88½ pounds per square inch on his body. The
area exposed of the average diver in armor is 720 inches, which would
have made the diver at that depth sustain a pressure of 66,960 pounds
or over 33 tons.

The water pressure on the diver is as follows:--

   20 feet       8½ lbs.
   30  ”        12¾  ”
   40  ”        17¼  ”
   50  ”        21¾  ”
   60  ”        26¼  ”
   70  ”        30½  ”
   80  ”        34¾  ”
   90  ”        39   ”
  100  ”        43½  ”
  110  ”        47¾  ”
  120  ”        52¼  ”
  130  ”        56½  ”
  140  ”        60¾  ”
  150  ”        65¼  ”

The limit

  160 feet      69¾ lbs.
  170  ”        74   ”
  180  ”        78   ”
  190  ”        82¼  ”
  204  ”        88½  ”

The air which sustains the diver’s life below the surface is pumped from
above by a powerful pump, which must be kept constantly at work while
the diver is down. A stoppage of the pump a single instant, while the
diver is in deep water, would result in his almost instant death from
the pressure of the water outside. Only persons of perfect health and
physique can pursue the calling of a diver. It would be suicidal for a
human being not of perfect health and physique to attempt the feat.

[Illustration: THE FIRST DIVING HELMET MADE.

From a Photograph.]

[Illustration: MODERN DIVER’S HELMET.

From a Photograph.]

Before a man attempts diving he should be examined by a physician or
medical officer. Men coming under any of the following classifications
should not, under any circumstances, attempt a dive. Men with short
necks, full-blooded, and florid complexions. Men who suffer from
headache, are slightly deaf, or have recently had a running from the
ear. Men who have at any time spat or coughed up blood. Men who have
been subject to palpitation of the heart. Men who are very pale,
whose lips are more blue than red, who are subject to cold hands and
feet, men who have, what is commonly known as, a poor circulation.
Men who have blood-shot eyes and a high color on the cheeks, by the
interlacement of numerous small blood-vessels, which are distinct. Men
who are hard drinkers and have suffered from any severe disease, or who
have had rheumatism or sun-stroke.

The dangers of diving are manifold, and so risky is the calling, that
there are only a few divers in the United States. The cheapest of them
command $10 a day for four or five hours work, and many of them get $50
and $60 for the same term of labor under water.

The greatest danger that besets the diver is not, as would doubtless be
supposed, the monsters of the deep, such as sharks, etc., or of getting
his air-hose entangled or fouled so as to cut off his air supply. It
is the risk he runs every time he dives of rupturing a blood-vessel
by the excessively compressed air he is compelled to breathe. Many
divers have been hauled up dead in the armor from no apparent cause,
when they had been plentifully supplied with air. In each case the
rupture of a blood-vessel in the brain by the air pressure, had caused
a fatal stroke of apoplexy. Divers have also died of fright in the
armor. In one instance a diver at work in the hold of a sunken vessel
got his air-hose so fouled, it was impossible to haul him up. Plenty
of fresh air, however, was supplied to him, but he was held prisoner
five hours, until another diver was procured to go down and free him.
When he was hauled up he was a corpse. Fright had killed him. The diver
is also subject to attacks by sharks, sword-fish, devil-fish and other
voracious monsters of the ocean’s depths. To defend himself against
them, he carries a double-edged knife, as sharp as a razor, which
screws into a watertight brass sheath, but is always ready for instant
use. It is the diver’s sole weapon of defense.

[Illustration: THE SENSATION OF THE FIRST DIVE. AT THE BOTTOM OF
SOUTHERN SEAS. FAIRYLAND BENEATH THE OCEAN. RECOVERING DEAD BODIES--A
GRUESOME FIND.]




HOW MRS. SORCHO BECAME A DIVER.


“As a girl in a quiet little home in Virginia, I little thought I would
ever become a diver. In fact I didn’t know what a real diver was.

“When I first saw the queer rig I shuddered, but now the grotesque
costume is as natural to me as is my tea-gown, and perhaps I feel a
little more at home in it.

“Only arms, limbs and a body well trained muscularly can walk about
in shoes that weigh 27 pounds apiece, supporting an armor with copper
helmet and breastplate, and leaden belt of weights which tip the
scale-beam at 246 pounds. Therefore, the commencement of my education
as a diver consisted of a year’s training in a school of physical
culture. When it was completed my muscles were as hard and springy
as steel, and I felt no fear on the score of physical strength as I
contemplated my first visit to the ‘bottom of the sea.’

“My first dive was off the southern coast of Florida, not far from
Clear Water Harbor. My husband was at the time engaged in the business
of collecting rare shells and coral for several Northern Universities.
I well remember how I felt when I first donned the armor. Fear and
curiosity were so closely blended that I hardly know which I felt
the most of. At any rate, my husband was waiting, and almost before
I realized it the queer canvas armor had been adjusted and the
breastplate had been slipped over my head. A thick pad or collar had
been put on my shoulders to take the weight off the breastplate and
helmet, which alone weigh 56 pounds; but even then the plate felt
quite heavy, and as the metal gaskets were being screwed down with
thumb-nuts and a wrench, I felt as if I were being screwed up in my
coffin. But there was little time for such gruesome reflections, and a
stout leather belt holding the sub-marine knife was next girded about
my waist.

“This knife, a double-edged affair, sharp as a razor, screws into a
watertight brass scabbard. It is the diver’s only weapon, and with it
he must protect himself against sharks and other sub-marine monsters.
The shoes come next. How heavy and awkward they looked, with their
soles of cast-iron two inches thick, and how clumsy they felt when I
tried to walk in them for the first time!

“The life-line--that all-important half-inch manilla rope--was then
knotted about my waist, and the belt of leaden weights was strapped
about me under the arms, and I was told to step over the railing of the
boat on to the short ladder that had been suspended over her stern. I
did so, mechanically I fear, and when I had managed to get down a few
steps, the helmet was slipped over my head and by a deft turn locked.

“The queer headpiece was much larger than my head, and admitted of
considerable freedom of movement inside it.

“‘Now recollect,’ said my husband, ‘if you want to come up quick in
case anything happens, give one jerk on the life-line. If you want more
air give two jerks, or less air three jerks.’

“I expected to shoot to the bottom like a lump of lead, owing to all
the weight I had on me, but I sank gradually instead, so buoyant was
the inflated armor. I was on the bottom with five fathoms of water over
my head almost before I realized it.

“I felt a sensation of pressure on the chest, and in my ears and
head, which was quite painful. The first thing that I noticed, was a
boiling of the water about me for which I was unable to account, until
I happened to think of the foul air escaping through the valve in the
back of the helmet.

[Illustration: CAPTAIN AND MRS. SORCHO.]

“I found, also, to my surprise, that I could see quite well some
distance about me, and observed a number of little fishes, which
finally swam quite close to me and appeared to gaze in the glass front
of the helmet with their little bead-like eyes, as though wondering
what sort of a fish I was. I felt strangely light and buoyant, and
found that with the slightest upward movement I would shoot surfaceward
several feet. The armor also felt so stiff and hard that I could
scarcely move in it.

“The next time I went down was not on a pleasure trip, but to work,
and for several weeks my husband and I took turns diving for shells and
curios. We finally completed our contract.

“Recovering a dead body is the task a diver dislikes more than any
other kind, and although I have recovered quite a number, the work is
yet horrible to me.

“The first dead body I ever brought to the surface was that of a man
who was supposed to have been murdered and thrown into a lake near
Atlanta, Ga. I searched the entire bottom of the lake, and finally in a
deep hole found the body.

“It was shockingly mutilated and disfigured, and was almost
unrecognizable, but we never found out whether the man had been
murdered or not.

“When I came to the surface with that bloated, disfigured corpse,
strong men were made sick and turned away, and to tell the truth I
felt a little squeamish myself; but it was a matter of business, not
sentiment, with me, so I doffed the armor and pocketed the reward that
had been offered.

“The exploding of sub-marine torpedoes is dangerous work, and you can
take my word for it that one does not feel very comfortable groping
about with five or six pounds of dynamite in her hand, not knowing what
minute it may take a notion to go off and blow her into kingdom come.
Diving is fascinating, but it is dangerous, and there are very few
women who would care to engage in it even if they had the nerve.”

  FRANCES NAMON SORCHO.

[Illustration: MRS. SORCHO AT WORK IN THE HOLD OF THE SUNKEN
TREASURE-SHIP, SENDING UP THE CHESTS OF GOLD.]




FEATS OF DIVERS.


Millions of dollars worth of property has been recovered from the
ocean’s depths by divers. One of the greatest achievements in this line
was by the famous English diver Lambert, who recovered vast treasure
from the _Alfonso XII_, a Spanish mail steamer belonging to the Lopez
Line, which sank off Point Gando, Grand Canary, in 26½ fathoms of
water. The salvage party was dispatched by the underwriters in May,
1885, the vessel having £100,000 in specie on board. For nearly six
months the operations were persevered in, before the divers could reach
the treasure-room beneath the three decks. Two divers lost their lives
in the vain attempt, the pressure of water being fatal. Mr. Gorman
recovered £90,000 from the wreck, and got £4,500 for doing it.

One of the most difficult operations ever performed by a diver, was the
recovering of the treasure sunk in the steamship Malabar off Galle. On
this occasion the large iron plates, half an inch thick, had to be cut
away from the mail room, and then the diver had to work through nine
feet of sand. The whole of the specie on board this vessel--upward of
$1,500,000--was saved, as much as $80,000 having been got out in one
day.

It is an interesting fact that from time to time expeditions have been
fitted out, and companies formed, with the sole intention of searching
for buried treasure beneath the sea. Again and again have expeditions
left New York and San Francisco in the certainty of recovering tons of
bullion sunk off the Brazilian coast, or lying undisturbed in the mud
of the Rio de la Plata.

At the end of 1885, the large steamer Indus, belonging to the P. & O.
Co., sank off Trincomalee, having on board a very valuable East India
cargo, together with a large amount of specie. This was another case
of a fortune found in the sea, for a very large amount of treasure was
recovered.

Another wreck, from which a large sum of gold coin and bullion was
recovered by divers, was that of the French ship _L’Orient_. She
is stated to have had on board specie of the value of no less than
$3,000,000, besides other treasure.

A parallel case to _L’Orient_ is that of the _Lutine_, a warship of
thirty-two guns, wrecked off the coast of Holland. This vessel sailed
from the Yarmouth Roads, with an immense quantity of treasure for the
Texel. In the course of the day it came on to blow a heavy gale; the
vessel was lost and went to pieces. Salving operations by divers,
during eighteen months, resulted in the recovery of $400,000 in specie.

Another remarkable case of recovery of specie is recorded, when
sixty-two chests of dollars, amounting to the value of about $350,000,
were recovered from the _Abergavenny_, sunk some years previously at
Weymouth, England.

A very notable case--not only for the amount of treasure on board, but
also for the big “windfall” for the salvors--is that of the _Thetis_,
a British frigate, wrecked off the coast of Brazil, with $800,000
in bullion on board. The hull went to pieces, leaving the treasure
at the bottom in five or six fathoms of water. The admiral of the
Brazil station, and the captains and crews of four sloops-of-war, were
engaged for eighteen months with divers in recovering the treasure.
The service was attended with great skill, labor and danger, and four
divers’ lives were lost.

A remarkable case of money having been recovered deserves a passing
notice. It was that of the finding of 3,800 sovereigns under a pier at
Melbourne, part of 5,000 missing from the steamer _Iberia_.

[Illustration: TREASURE-CHEST FROM THE “ALFONSO XII,” WITH GOLD COIN
SET IN THE PANEL.

From a Photograph.]

Some Danish speculators are reaping a harvest of golden grain from
the depths of the sea which washes the coast of Jutland. Some years
ago, the British steamship Helen, laden with copper, foundered. All
her cargo has been recovered. The steamer Westdale, laden with 2,000
tons of iron, went down off the Danish coast in 1888. Nearly the whole
cargo, her machinery, and a great part of her fittings, have been
saved by Jutland divers.

Dredging operations carried on at Santander, Spain, resulted in the
discovery of the well-preserved wreck of a warship of the fifteenth
or sixteenth century. She must have been in her present position for
four hundred years, and was partly covered by a deposit of sand and
mud. Divers brought up guns which bore the united arms of Castile and
Aragon, the scroll of Isabella, or the crown and initial of Ferdinand.
The ship was probably employed as a transport, and inasmuch as some of
the arms are of French and Italian make, it is supposed she formed part
of the fortunate expedition against Naples under Gonzalo de Cordoba.


THE PENN SHOW PRINT, Phila.




      *      *      *      *      *      *




Transcriber’s note:

  Page 15: Have removed the extraneous word ‘feet’, used twice.

  Page 16: Have italicized L’Orient in keeping with the other time
    it was mentioned.

  Have added a full stop to all chapter headings where they are missing,
    to keep consistency.



***END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK LIFE AND ADVENTURES OF FRANCES NAMON
SORCHO***


******* This file should be named 57172-0.txt or 57172-0.zip *******


This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
http://www.gutenberg.org/dirs/5/7/1/7/57172


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for the eBooks, unless you receive
specific permission. If you do not charge anything for copies of this
eBook, complying with the rules is very easy. You may use this eBook
for nearly any purpose such as creation of derivative works, reports,
performances and research. They may be modified and printed and given
away--you may do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks
not protected by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the
trademark license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the
Foundation" or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg-tm License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country outside the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work
on which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you'll have to check the laws of the country where you
  are located before using this ebook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format
other than "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original "Plain
Vanilla ASCII" or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg-tm License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
provided that

* You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation."

* You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg-tm
  works.

* You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

* You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and The
Project Gutenberg Trademark LLC, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark. Contact the Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg-tm collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org 

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary 
Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is in Fairbanks, Alaska, with the
mailing address: PO Box 750175, Fairbanks, AK 99775, but its
volunteers and employees are scattered throughout numerous
locations. Its business office is located at 809 North 1500 West, Salt
Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up to
date contact information can be found at the Foundation's web site and
official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:

    Dr. Gregory B. Newby
    Chief Executive and Director
    gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

